---
title: 2.5. Hello, Lane!
short-title: Hello Lane
description: "Open lanes on SwimOS Web Agents."
group: Getting Started
layout: documentation
redirect_from:
  - /developer-guide/hello-lane
  - /developer-guide/hello-lane.html
  - /developer-guide/2-5-hello-lane/
---

Now that we've established several agents, the next step is to expose their state and provide a method for interacting with them. 
This is where lanes come into play.
Lanes will be thoroughly covered in a dedicated chapter.
To help you start using lanes, we'll bypass certain details until that chapter.

# Opening a Lane

Let's add the most basic form of a lane - a command lane - to the `Agent` class we had before.

_File: src/main/java/tutorial/Agent.java_

```java
package tutorial;
import swim.api.SwimLane;
import swim.api.agent.AbstractAgent;
import swim.api.lane.CommandLane;

public class Agent extends AbstractAgent {

  @SwimLane("mission")
  CommandLane<String> mission = this.<String>commandLane()
      .onCommand(mission -> System.out.println(nodeUri() + ": Mission: " + mission));

  @Override
  public void didStart() {
    System.out.println(nodeUri() + ": Hello, agent!");
  }

}
```

Breaking this down a bit:

- We have created a command lane variable named `mission`, using the `AbstractAgent`s `commandLane()` method.

- The lane has a `String` parameter type, matching the type of payload it will receive.

- We add an `onCommand` callback that logs the payload received. 
_This is not a compulsory and lanes can be created with no callbacks attached._

- We annotate the lane variable with `@SwimLane`, passing the lane URI of `mission` as an argument.

This has essentially created a method on the agent that can be called from anywhere.
Going back to the `didStart` method of our `MainPlane`, we can modify our commands to test this lane.

_File: src/main/java/tutorial/MainPlane.java_

```java
 @Override
  public void didStart() {
    System.out.println("Hello, world!");
    command("/Bond", "mission", Text.from("Protect and serve"));
    command("/Holmes", "mission", Text.from("Crack the case"));
}
```

Notice that the middle argument we left blank before is now occupied with the URI of the lane we just created.

The third and final argument of the command is the payload.
This topic will be explored in greater detail in a subsequent chapter.
However, for now, it's important to understand that in order for SwimOS to transmit payloads, they must be serializable to Recon.
This is why we convert the strings to `Text` objects.

Let's give this a run:

```text
$ ./gradlew run

> Task :run
Starting server...
Hello, world!
Running server...
/Bond: Hello, agent!
/Holmes: Hello, agent!
/Holmes: Mission: Crack the case
/Bond: Mission: Protect and serve
<=========----> 75% EXECUTING [1s]
```

We can see a few things happening here as a result of us commanding the lane.
Initially, as observed previously, the agent didn't exist, prompting the initiation of a new one and triggering the `didStart` callback.
Subsequently, the `onCommand` callback on the `mission` lane is invoked, passing along the payload we provided.

This is a great start to building streaming applications - agents and lanes are the core of SwimOS.
In the upcoming chapters, we'll circle back to cover certain details we skipped over and introduce you to new features of agents and lanes.